As the earliest suspicion of dawn appeared on Sunday morning, Huck came groping up the
hill and rapped gently at the old Welshman's door. The inmates were asleep, but it was
set on a hair-trigger, on account of the exciting episode of the night. A call came from a
window.
"'Who's there?' Huck's scared voice answered in a low tone.
"'Please let me in. It's only Huck Finn.'
"'It's a name that can open this door night or day, lad, and welcome.' These were strange
words to the vagabond boy's ears, and the pleasantest he had ever heard. He could not
recollect that the closing word had ever been applied in his case before. The door was
quickly unlocked, and he entered. Huck was given a seat, and the old man and his brace
of tall suns speedily dressed themselves.
"'Now, my boy, I hope you're good and hungry, because breakfast will be ready as soon as
the sun's up, and we'll have a piping hot one, too. Make yourself easy about that. I and
the boys hoped you'd turn up and stop here last night.'
"'I was awful scared,' said Huck, and I run. I took out when the pistols went off, and
for three miles. I've come now because I wanted to know about it, you know, and I come before
daylight because I didn't want to run across them devils even if they was dead.'
"'Well, poor chap, you do look as if you'd had a hard night of it. But there's a bed
here for you, when you've had your breakfast.'
"'No, they ain't dead, lad. We were sorry enough for that. You see, we knew rightward
to put our hands on them, by your description, so we crept along on tiptoe till we got within
fifteen feet of them, dark as the cellar that Sumac Path was. And just then I found I was
going to sneeze. It was the meanest kind of luck. I tried to keep it back, but no use.
It was bound to come, and it did come. I was in the lead with my pistol raised, and when
the sneeze started, those scoundrels were rustling to get out of the path. I sung out
FIRE, boys, and blazed away at the place where the rustling was. So did the boys. But they
were off in a jiffy, those villains, and we after them down through the woods. I judge
we never touched them. They fired a shot apiece as they started, but their bullets whizzed
by and didn't do us any harm. As soon as we lost the sound of their feet, we quit chasing,
and went down and stirred up the constables. They got a posse together, and went off to
guard the river bank. And as soon as it is light, the sheriff and a gang are going to
beat up the woods. My boys will be with them presently. I wish we had some sort of description
of those rascals. It would help a good deal. But you couldn't see what they were like
in the dark, lad, I suppose.
Oh, yes, I saw them down town and followed them.
Splendid! Describe them! Describe them, my boy!
One is the old deaf and dumb Spaniard that's been round here once or twice, and tothers
a mean-looking ragged—
That's enough, lad, we know the men. Happened on them in the woods, back of the widows one
day, and they slunk away.
Off with you, boys, and tell the sheriff, get your breakfast tomorrow morning."
The Welshman's sons departed at once. As they were leaving the room, Huck sprang up and
exclaimed,
Oh, please don't tell anybody it was me that blowed on them! Oh, please!
All right, if you say it, Huck, but you ought to have the credit of what you did. Oh, no,
no, please don't tell!
When the young men were gone, the old Welshman said,
They won't tell, and I won't. But why don't you want it known?
Huck would not explain. Further than to say that he already knew too much about one of
those men, and would not have the man know that he knew anything against him for the
whole world. He would be killed for knowing it, sure.
The old man promised secrecy once more, and said,
How did you come to follow these fellows, lad? Were they looking suspicious?
Huck was silent, while he framed a duly cautious reply, and then he said,
Well, you see, I'm a kind of a hard lot, at least everybody says so, and I don't see nothing
again it, and sometimes I can't sleep much on accounts of thinking about it, and sort
of trying to strike out a new way of doing. That was the way it was last night, I couldn't
sleep, and so I come along up street about midnight at turning it all over, and when
I got to that old shackly brick store by the Temperance Tavern, I backed up again the wall
to have another think. Well, just then along comes these two chaps, slipping along close
by me, with something under their arm, and I reckoned they'd stole it. One was a-smoking,
and t'other one wanted a light, so they stopped right before me, and the cigars lit up their
faces, and I see that the big one was the deaf and dumb Spaniard, by his white whiskers
and the patch on his eye, and t'other one was a rusty ragged-looking devil. Could you
see the rags by the light of the cigars?
This staggered Huck for a moment. Then he said,
"'Well, I don't know, but somehow it seems as if I did.'
"'Then they went on, and you?'
"'Follow them, yes. That was it. I wanted to see what was up.'
"'They sneaked along, so I dogged them to the Witter's style, and stood in the dark,
and heard the ragged one beg for the Witter, and the Spaniard swear he'd spile her looks,
just as I told you, in your two--"
"'What? The deaf and dumb man said all that?'
Huck had made another terrible mistake. He was trying his best to keep the old man from
getting the faintest hint of who the Spaniard might be, and yet his tongue seemed determined
to get him into trouble in spite of all he could do. He made several efforts to creep
out of his scrape, but the old man's eye was upon him, and he made blunder after blunder.
Presently the Welshman said,
"'My boy, don't be afraid of me. I wouldn't hurt a hair of your head for all the world.
No, I'd protect you. I'll—I'd protect you. This Spaniard is not deaf and dumb. You've
let that slip without intending it. You can't cover that up now. You know something about
that Spaniard that you want to keep dark. Now trust me. Tell me what it is, and trust
me. I won't betray you.'
Huck looked into the old man's honest eyes a moment, then bent over and whispered in
his ear,
"'Taint the Spaniard. It's Injun Joe!"
The Welshman almost jumped out of his chair. In a moment he said,
"'It's all plain enough now. When you talked about notching ears and the slitting noses,
I judged that was your own embellishment, because white men don't take that sort of
revenge. But an Injun, that's a different matter altogether.'
During breakfast the talk went on, and in the course of it the old man said that the
bed was to get a lantern, and examine the style and its vicinity for marks of blood.
They found none, but captured a bulky bundle of—
"'Of what?'
If the words had been lightning they could not have leapt with a more stunning suddenness
from Huck's blanched lips. His eyes were staring wide now, and his breath suspended, waiting
for the answer. The Welshman started, stared in return, three seconds, five seconds, ten.'
Then replied,
"'Of burglar's tools. Why, what's the matter with you?'
Huck sank back, panting gently, but deeply, unutterably grateful. The Welshman eyed him
gravely, curiously, and presently said,
"'Yes, burglar's tools. That appears to relieve you a good deal. But what did give you that
turn? What were you expecting we'd found?'
Huck was in a close place. The inquiring eye was upon him. He would have given anything
for material for a plausible answer. Nothing suggested itself. The inquiring eye was boring
deeper and deeper. A senseless reply offered. There was no time to weigh it. So at a venture
he uttered it, feebly.
"'Sunday school books, maybe?'
Poor Huck was too distressed to smile. But the old man laughed loud and joyously, shook
up the details of his anatomy from head to foot, and ended by saying that such a laugh
was money in a man's pocket, because it cut down the doctor's bills like everything. Then
he added,
"'Poor old chap! You're white and jaded. You ain't well a bit. No wonder you're a little
flighty and off your balance. But you'll come out of it. Rest and sleep. We'll catch you
up all right, I hope.'
Huck was irritated to think he had been such a goose, and betrayed such a suspicious excitement,
for he had dropped the idea that the parcel brought from the tavern was the treasure as
soon as he had heard the talk at the Witter's style. He had only thought it was not the
treasure, however. He had not known that it wasn't, and so the suggestion of a captured
bundle was too much for his self-possession. But on the whole he felt glad the little episode
had happened, for now he knew beyond all question that that bundle was not THE bundle, and so
his mind was at rest and exceedingly comfortable. In fact, everything seemed to be drifting
just in the right direction now. The treasurer must be still in number two. The men would
be captured and jailed that day, and he and Tom could seize the gold that night without
any trouble or any fear of interruption.
Just as breakfast was completed there was a knock at the door. Huck jumped for a hiding
place, for he had no mind to be connected even remotely with the late event. The Welshman
admitted several ladies and gentlemen, among them the widow Douglas, and noticed that groups
of citizens were climbing up the hill to stare at the style, so the news had spread.
The Welshman had to tell the story of the night to the visitors. The widow's gratitude
for her preservation was outspoken.
"'Don't say a word about it, madam. There's another that you're more beholden to than
you are to me and my boys, maybe, but he don't allow me to tell his name. We wouldn't have
been there but for him.' Of course, this excited a curiosity so vast that it almost belittled
the main matter, but the Welshman allowed it to eat into the vitals of his visitors,
and through them be transmitted to the whole town, for he refused to part with his secret.
When all else had been learned, the widow said,
"'I went to sleep reading in bed, and slept straight through all that noise. Why didn't
you come and wake me?'
"'We judged it weren't worth while. Those fellows weren't likely to come again. They
had many tools left to work with. And what was the use of waking you up and scaring you
to death? My three negro men stood guard at your house all the rest of the night. They've
just come back.'
More visitors came, and the story had to be told and retold for a couple of hours more.
There was no Sabbath school during day-school vacation, but everybody was early at church.
The stirring event was well canvassed. News came that not a sign of the two villains had
been yet discovered. When the sermon was finished, Judge Thatcher's wife dropped alongside of
Mrs. Harper as she moved down the aisle with a crowd, and said,
"'Is my Becky going to sleep all day? I just expected she would be tired to death.'
"'Your Becky?'
"'Yes,' with a startled look. "'Didn't she stay with you last night?'
"'Why, no!' Mrs. Thatcher turned pale and sank into a pew, just as Aunt Polly, talking
briskly with a friend, passed by. Aunt Polly said,
"'Good morning, Mrs. Thatcher. Good morning, Mrs. Harper. I've got a boy that's
turned up missing. I reckon my Tom stayed at your house last night—one of you. And
now he's afraid to come to church. I've got to settle with him.'
Mrs. Thatcher shook her head feebly and turned paler than ever.
"'He didn't stay with us,' said Mrs. Harper, beginning to look uneasy. A marked anxiety
came into Aunt Polly's face.
"'Joe Harper, have you seen my Tom this morning?'
"'No, ma'am.'
"'When did you see him last?' Joe tried to remember, but was not sure he could say. The
people had stopped moving out of church, whispers passed along, and aboding uneasiness took
possession of every countenance. Children were anxiously questioned, and young teachers.
They all said they had not noticed whether Tom and Becky were on board the ferry-boat
on the homeward trip. It was dark. No one thought of inquiring if anyone was missing.
One young man finally blurted out his fear that they were still in the cave. Mrs. Thatcher
wound away. Aunt Polly fell to crying and wringing her hands.
The alarm swept from lip to lip, from group to group, from street to street, and within
five minutes the bells were wildly clanging and the whole town was up. The Cardiff Hill
episode sank into instant insignificance, the burglars were forgotten, horses were saddled,
skiffs were manned, the ferry-boat ordered out, and before the horror was half an hour
old, two hundred men were pouring down High Road and River toward the cave. All the long
afternoon the village seemed empty and dead. Many women visited Aunt Polly and Mrs. Thatcher
and tried to comfort them. They cried with them, too, and that was still better than
words. All the tedious night the town waited for news, but when the morning dawned at last
all the word that came was, Send more candles, and send food!
Mrs. Thatcher was almost crazed, and Aunt Polly also. Judge Thatcher sent messages of
hope and encouragement from the cave, but they conveyed no real cheer. The old Welshman
came home toward daylight, spattered with candle-grease, smeared with clay, and almost
worn out. He found Huck still in the bed, that had been provided for him, and delirious
with fever. The physicians were all at the cave, so the widow Douglas came and took charge
of the patient. She said she would do her best by him, because, whether he was good,
or bad, or indifferent, he was the Lord's, and nothing that was the Lord's was a thing
to be neglected. The Welshman said Huck had good spots in him, and the widow said,
"'You can depend on it. That's the Lord's mark. He don't leave it off. He never does.
Puts it somewhere on every creature that comes from his hands.'"
Early in the forenoon parties of jaded men began to straggle into the village, but the
strongest of the citizens continued searching. All the news that could be gained was that
the remotenesses of the cavern were being ransacked, that had never been visited before,
that every corner and crevice was going to be thoroughly searched, that, wherever one
wandered through the maze of passages, lights were to be seen flitting hither and thither
in the distance, and shoutings and pistol-shots sent their hollow reverberations to the ear
down the somber aisles. In one place, far from the section usually traversed by tourists,
the names Becky and Tom had been found traced upon the rocky wall with candle-smoke and
near at hand a grease-soiled bit of ribbon. Mrs. Thatcher recognized the ribbon and cried
over it. She said it was the last relic she would ever have of her child, and that no
other memorial of her could ever be so precious, because this one parted latest from the living
body before the awful death came. Some said that now and then in the cave a faraway speck
of light would glimmer, and then a glorious shout would burst forth, and a score of men
go trooping down the echoing aisle, and then a sickening disappointment always followed.
The children were not there. It was only a searcher's light. Three dreadful days and
nights dragged their tedious hours along, and the village sank into a hopeless stupor.
No one had heart for anything. The accidental discovery just made that the proprietor of
kept liquor on his premises, scarcely fluttered the public pulse, tremendous as the fact was.
In a lucid interval Huck feebly led up to the subject of taverns, and finally asked,
dimly dreading the worst, if anything had been discovered at the Temperance Tavern since
he had been ill.
"'Yes,' said the widow. Huck started up in bed wild-eyed.
"'What? What was it?'
"'Liquor. And the place has been shut up.'
"'Lie down, child. What a turn you did give me. Only tell me just one thing, only just
one, please. Was it Tom Sawyer that found it?'
The widow burst into tears.
"'Hush, hush, child, hush. I've told you before, you must not talk. You are very, very
sick.'
Then nothing but liquor had been found. There would have been a great pow-wow if it had
been the gold. So the treasure was gone for ever—gone for ever. But what could she be
crying about? Curious that she should cry? These thoughts worked their dim way through
Huck's mind, and under the weariness they gave him—'
He fell asleep.
The widow said to herself,
"'There! He's asleep, poor wreck. Tom Sawyer find it. Pity but somebody could find Tom
Sawyer. Ah, there ain't many left now. It's got hope enough, or strength enough, either,
to go on searching.'
End of chapter 30